Algernon.  I suspected that, my dear fellow!  I have Bunburyed all over Shropshire on two separate occasions.  Now, go on.  Why are you Ernest in town and Jack in the country?

Jack.  My dear Algy, I don’t know whether you will be able to understand my real motives.  You are hardly serious enough.  When one is placed in the position of guardian, one has to adopt a very high moral tone on all subjects.  It’s one’s duty to do so.  And as a high moral tone can hardly be said to conduce very much to either one’s health or one’s happiness, in order to get up to town I have always pretended to have a younger brother of the name of Ernest, who lives in the Albany, and gets into the most dreadful scrapes.  That, my dear Algy, is the whole truth pure and simple.

Algernon.  The truth is rarely pure and never simple.  Modern life would be very tedious if it were either, and modern literature a complete impossibility!

Jack.  That wouldn’t be at all a bad thing.

Algernon.  Literary criticism is not your forte, my dear fellow.  Don’t try it.  You should leave that to people who haven’t been at a University.  They do it so well in the daily papers.  What you really are is a Bunburyist.  I was quite right in saying you were a Bunburyist.  You are one of the most advanced Bunburyists I know.

Jack.  What on earth do you mean?

Algernon.  You have invented a very useful younger brother called Ernest, in order that you may be able to come up to town as often as you like.  I have invented an invaluable permanent invalid called Bunbury, in order that I may be able to go down into the country whenever I choose.  Bunbury is perfectly invaluable.  If it wasn’t for Bunbury’s extraordinary bad health, for instance, I wouldn’t be able to dine with you at Willis’s to-night, for I have been really engaged to Aunt Augusta for more than a week.

Jack.  I haven’t asked you to dine with me anywhere to-night.

Algernon.  I know.  You are absurdly careless about sending out invitations.  It is very foolish of you.  Nothing annoys people so much as not receiving invitations.

Jack.  You had much better dine with your Aunt Augusta.

Algernon.  I haven’t the smallest intention of doing anything of the kind.  To begin with, I dined there on Monday, and once a week is quite enough to dine with one’s own relations.  In the second place, whenever I do dine there I am always treated as a member of the family, and sent down with either no woman at all, or two.  In the third place, I know perfectly well whom she will place me next to, to-night.  She will place me next Mary Farquhar, who always flirts with her own husband across the dinner-table.  That is not very pleasant.  Indeed, it is not even decent . . . and that sort of thing is enormously on the increase.  The amount of women in London who flirt with their own husbands is perfectly scandalous.  It looks so bad.  It is simply washing one’s clean linen in public.  Besides, now that I know you to be a confirmed Bunburyist I naturally want to talk to you about Bunburying.  I want to tell you the rules.

Jack.  I’m not a Bunburyist at all.  If Gwendolen accepts me, I am going to kill my brother, indeed I think I’ll kill him in any case.  Cecily is a little too much interested in him.  It is rather a bore.  So I am going to get rid of Ernest.  And I strongly advise you to do the same with Mr. . . . with your invalid friend who has the absurd name.

Algernon.  Nothing will induce me to part with Bunbury, and if you ever get married, which seems to me extremely problematic, you will be very glad to know Bunbury.  A man who marries without knowing Bunbury has a very tedious time of it.

Jack.  That is nonsense.  If I marry a charming girl like Gwendolen, and she is the only girl I ever saw in my life that I would marry, I certainly won’t want to know Bunbury.

Algernon.  Then your wife will.  You don’t seem to realise, that in married life three is company and two is none.

Jack.  [Sententiously.]  That, my dear young friend, is the theory that the corrupt French Drama has been propounding for the last fifty years.

Algernon.  Yes; and that the happy English home has proved in half the time.

Jack.  For heaven’s sake, don’t try to be cynical.  It’s perfectly easy to be cynical.

Algernon.  My dear fellow, it isn’t easy to be anything nowadays.  There’s such a lot of beastly competition about.  [The sound of an electric bell is heard.]  Ah! that must be Aunt Augusta.  Only relatives, or creditors, ever ring in that Wagnerian manner.  Now, if I get her out of the way for ten minutes, so that you can have an opportunity for proposing to Gwendolen, may I dine with you to-night at Willis’s?

Jack.  I suppose so, if you want to.

mrs. cheveley.  Oh, no!  This is the game of life as we all have to play it, Sir Robert, sooner or later!

sir robert chiltern.  I cannot do what you ask me.

mrs. cheveley.  You mean you cannot help doing it.  You know you are standing on the edge of a precipice.  And it is not for you to make terms.  It is for you to accept them.  Supposing you refuse—

sir robert chiltern.  What then?

mrs. cheveley.  My dear Sir Robert, what then?  You are ruined, that is all!  Remember to what a point your Puritanism in England has brought you.  In old days nobody pretended to be a bit better than his neighbours.  In fact, to be a bit better than one’s neighbour was considered excessively vulgar and middle-class.  Nowadays, with our modern mania for morality, every one has to pose as a paragon of purity, incorruptibility, and all the other seven deadly virtues—and what is the result?  You all go over like ninepins—one after the other.  Not a year passes in England without somebody disappearing.  Scandals used to lend charm, or at least interest, to a man—now they crush him.  And yours is a very nasty scandal. You couldn’t survive it.  If it were known that as a young man, secretary to a great and important minister, you sold a Cabinet secret for a large sum of money, and that that was the origin of your wealth and career, you would be hounded out of public life, you would disappear completely.  And after all, Sir Robert, why should you sacrifice your entire future rather than deal diplomatically with your enemy?  For the moment I am your enemy.  I admit it!  And I am much stronger than you are.  The big battalions are on my side.  You have a splendid position, but it is your splendid position that makes you so vulnerable.  You can’t defend it!  And I am in attack.  Of course I have not talked morality to you.  You must admit in fairness that I have spared you that.  Years ago you did a clever, unscrupulous thing; it turned out a great success.  You owe to it your fortune and position.  And now you have got to pay for it.  Sooner or later we have all to pay for what we do.  You have to pay now.  Before I leave you to-night, you have got to promise me to suppress your report, and to speak in the House in favour of this scheme.


lady chiltern.  It can never be necessary to do what is not honourable.  Or if it be necessary, then what is it that I have loved!  But it is not, Robert; tell me it is not.  Why should it be?  What gain would you get?  Money?  We have no need of that!  And money that comes from a tainted source is a degradation.  Power?  But power is nothing in itself.  It is power to do good that is fine—that, and that only.  What is it, then?  Robert, tell me why you are going to do this dishonourable thing!

sir robert chiltern.  Gertrude, you have no right to use that word.  I told you it was a question of rational compromise.  It is no more than that.

lady chiltern.  Robert, that is all very well for other men, for men who treat life simply as a sordid speculation; but not for you, Robert, not for you.  You are different.  All your life you have stood apart from others.  You have never let the world soil you.  To the world, as to myself, you have been an ideal always.  Oh! be that ideal still.  That great inheritance throw not away—that tower of ivory do not destroy.  Robert, men can love what is beneath them—things unworthy, stained, dishonoured.  We women worship when we love; and when we lose our worship, we lose everything.  Oh! don’t kill my love for you, don’t kill that!

lord goring.  I sincerely hope not, father.  However, I am delighted at what you tell me about Robert, thoroughly delighted.  It shows he has got pluck.

lord caversham.  He has got more than pluck, sir, he has got genius.

lord goring.  Ah! I prefer pluck.  It is not so common, nowadays, as genius is.

lord caversham.  I wish you would go into Parliament.

lord goring.  My dear father, only people who look dull ever get into the House of Commons, and only people who are dull ever succeed there.

lord caversham.  Why don’t you try to do something useful in life?

lord goring.  I am far too young.

lord caversham.  [Testily.]  I hate this affectation of youth, sir.  It is a great deal too prevalent nowadays.

lord goring.  Youth isn’t an affectation.  Youth is an art.

lord caversham.  Why don’t you propose to that pretty Miss Chiltern?

lord goring.  I am of a very nervous disposition, especially in the morning.

lord caversham.  I don’t suppose there is the smallest chance of her accepting you.

lord goring.  I don’t know how the betting stands to-day.

lord caversham.  If she did accept you she would be the prettiest fool in England.

lord goring.  That is just what I should like to marry.  A thoroughly sensible wife would reduce me to a condition of absolute idiocy in less than six months.

lord caversham.  You don’t deserve her, sir.